Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Manager of
Software Technology Evangelism,
John Geleynse.
Hey, good morning.
Welcome to the second session
of the second day of WC 2004.
I hope that this is turning out to
be a really great conference for you,
and I hope that at the end of the week,
you look back and say this is an
incredibly valuable week for you,
and you've gained a lot of experience
developing software on the platform.
Let's see, is this the right slide?
There we are.
This is the one I want to start on.
This session is all about
how to distinguish your
application on the platform.
We're going to talk about UI stuff,
designing for Aqua.
We're going to talk about technology,
choices.
We're going to talk about
planning your product.
I just want to say up front that a
lot of this content is based on my
experience and the experience of my
team working with many of you and your
peers over the last year or two years,
helping you to understand what's going
on in the platform and how do you
take your product to the next level.
This content really comes out of all
of those conversations and all of those
meetings and is an attempt on my part
to just clone those conversations and
share the information that we've shared
with so many other developers with you.
It's not meant to be
all-encompassing in any way,
shape, or form,
but I think it's touching on
the areas that I think people
have the most difficulty with.
I hope you find it valuable.
I'd love to hear your
feedback after the session,
either through email or through
conversations directly with me.
I want to talk about what it takes to
create a great product on the platform,
and I want to do that by drawing
an analogy with the food industry
or the restaurant industry.
And I want to begin with
the fast food experience,
right?
What do we know about
the fast food experience?
Well, we know that there's a lot
of unskilled kitchen staff,
right?
We know that there's a lot of
frozen mass-produced ingredients.
It's all about getting lots of
stuff out there really fast,
getting this material prepared
quickly for the customers,
and a lot of mass-produced ingredients.
Poor nutritional value.
By and large,
most fast food joints aren't in
existence for good nutrition,
even though there's a lot
of advertising around that.
But that's sort of a fact.
And these are John's sort of statements
about the fast food industry.
They're not, you know,
anything more than that.
But take it for what it is.
A lot of artificial flavor.
I read a really great book
recently that said that chicken
McNuggets and such were,
you know,
produced in a lab and the aromas that
you smell are completely fabricated.
It has nothing to do
with the food itself.
So interesting.
What else do we know about
the fast food industry?
Well, a lot of poor presentation.
Most of the time,
stuff is slapped together
by unskilled kitchen staff,
thrown on a plate or in a container,
and there you have it, right?
It's all about the speed with which you
get the food and address your appetite
than it is about the presentation.
And lastly, we know that mostly the fast
food experience probably
isn't that good for you,
right?
I say bad for you,
but maybe that would be
misrepresenting things,
but it's not necessarily
that good for you.
Now let's compare the fast food
industry to the fast food industry.
experience with fine dining.
Well,
unskilled kitchen staff is certainly
replaced by highly skilled kitchen staff,
people who have trained
their lives for this stuff,
trained to learn how to cook and
put this stuff together in a really,
really great way.
Frozen mass-produced ingredients.
The Mac OS X is a great way to
develop your Mac OS X experience.
You can use it to create
your own Mac OS X app,
or you can use it to create
your own Mac OS X app.
You can use it to create
Good nutritional value.
By and large, you know,
if you go to a great restaurant,
it's all about good food, right?
The flavors are mouthwatering.
They're really good.
It's not artificial flavors.
It's the real stuff, right?
The real McCoy.
Attractive presentation.
I mean, some of the restaurants
that I've been to,
and I'm no guy for haute cuisine here,
but I've been to some nice
places here in San Francisco,
and the presentation has a whole lot
to do with the enjoyment of the meal.
The food is fantastic,
but certainly the presentation is great.
And lastly, by and large,
you know the fine dining experience,
the food that you eat,
the whole experience, in fact,
is probably, in a holistic sense,
really good for you.
It's probably good for you in
terms of nutritional value,
but the overall experience of
going to this fine dining evening
or what have you is good for you.
And so I want to draw this analogy
between the fast food experience
and fine dining experience and
software development on the platform.
I ran the Apple Design Awards this year,
and I do that every year,
and we get a ton of submissions.
This year we had less time to judge even
more submissions than we've ever had.
And I'll tell you,
a lot of submissions fell in the
category of fine dining experience.
It was a fine software experience.
But there was a percentage
that was really fast food.
It was somebody just
threw something together,
shipped the product,
and threw it into Design Awards.
And I think, not I think,
this session is all about teaching you,
giving you the insight and
expertise to create a really
great fine dining experience on
the platform with your software.
So, what does it take to
create a great experience,
a great dinner party?
Or if you're the manager
of a great fine restaurant,
what does it take to
pull this all together?
Well,
essentially there's kind of five steps.
And again, I'm in the software industry.
I don't run a restaurant,
but this is kind of my perspective,
so take it for what it's worth.
But I think to create that kind of
an experience for your customers,
it takes these five steps.
Planning your menu,
extending a warm welcome,
creating a great ambiance,
sweating the details, right?
Choosing the right silverware, utensils,
choosing the right linens,
picking the right music,
and all of the stuff that goes
into an evening that you might
put together for your friends or
if you're running a restaurant,
right?
All of those things matter,
and if some of them aren't there,
the experience can go
downhill pretty quickly.
And lastly, ensure quality service.
A great restaurant can totally torpedo
in your opinion if the service sucks.
If nobody's there to get what you want,
when you want it,
or get rid of stuff when
you want to get rid of it,
your opinion can go down really quickly.
Well, let's take that and compare it to
the software development process.
To create a great
application on the platform,
you don't need to choose your menu,
but you do need to plan.
You also need to create
a great first impression.
As you walk to a restaurant with your
date or whoever you're going with,
that first impression,
as you walk into the restaurant and you
smell the aromas and the temperature is
right and the ambiance is just great,
that can set the evening off either to
a great start or it can totally ruin
the evening right from the get-go.
Sweating the details for software
development is all about paying attention
and choosing the right fundamentals,
including the essential ingredients,
the essential elements in your product.
And we're going to talk
about all of these.
Creating an attractive
ambiance in the software sense,
I'm talking about creating a great
ambiance with your software through Aqua.
And we'll get into that detail.
And lastly, I think great service,
the analogy to software,
is delivering a really responsive,
high-performance application.
And if you think of the experience
that you've had running software,
the products that are less likely to
be on your top choice are the products
that are not really responsive,
or they're either lagging somewhere,
that don't really respond in
the way that you want them to.
And I think that's a lot like the
experience we have at restaurants,
where the waiter isn't
there when we want it,
and our needs aren't met exactly.
So, let's go through these individually.
First of all, planning.
This is about deciding what to
make and whom to make it for.
There's about four or five steps here,
and this is not the all-encompassing
list of what you need to do
for planning your software.
This is, based on my experience
working with developers,
these are the areas that most developers,
I think, don't spend enough time on.
So the first thing that's critical,
I think,
is understanding who your users are.
First of all, first and foremost,
you're not your user.
You might come from the
experience of your users.
You might have been a teacher
previously in your previous life,
and now you're a software
developer for K through 12,
or you might have been an accountant,
but now you're writing software for
personal finance or what have you.
So you might have some
sense of who your user is,
but you are no longer your user.
You're the developer,
and you have business pressures,
and you've got all kinds
of things that are going to
influence the decisions you make.
It's important for you to understand who
your users are and what their needs are,
what their priorities are,
what their expertise is.
And understanding,
based upon their expertise,
that some users who aren't that
sophisticated are going to become
proficient in certain tasks,
and your software needs to lead
them towards that proficiency,
and they're going to graduate
to more complex tasks as well.
But highly sophisticated users on
the computer with your software are
going to be masters at some tasks,
novices at others,
and are going to be frustrated mostly
when your product gets in the way.
Well, this seems like common sense,
right?
Truth of the matter is,
I think most software developers
are trying to aim for whoever
the heck will buy their product.
It's like, okay,
let's just throw everything into this
puppy and hope that anybody in the world,
you know,
whoever can buy it will buy it because
it's just another customer for us.
But the truth is,
I think some of the best products on the
platform are the ones that are focused,
very focused on a particular market
segment and at a particular set of users.
And they address the
needs of those users,
and they address the
needs of those users.
perfectly and those products
totally dominate that space.
And think for a minute of some
of the software that you use
that fits into that space.
I mean,
I think all of us could probably identify
a product or two that fits into that.
So it's critical, I think,
to pick your audience and know what
their needs are and pay attention
to how sophisticated they are.
And a great example of this, for example,
is if you were going for
less sophisticated users and
producing an iMovie type product.
I mean, right from the get-go,
Apple said, you know what,
iMovie is for home users.
They're infrequently on the computer.
They're going to be bothered
or hindered in some way by the
multi-windowing environment of Mac OS X.
We'll just give them a full
screen experience because
they're totally focused on
that exercise of editing video.
That was a very deliberate decision
on our part to create a product
for less sophisticated users.
Clearly, the experience with
Final Cut Pro is different than
the experience with iMovie,
right?
So there's two examples of
how the product design was
influenced by the user base,
and that's kind of the point
I want to make for you guys.
So the first step in planning
was understanding your users.
The second one is sort of
knowing your application.
Understand your application.
Understand what it is that
you really want your app to do
and get a good grasp of that.
And I think as you come to define what
it is you want your application to do,
you need to take into account
the fact that you have a lot
of experience with the app.
You, your company, you as an individual,
you, your company,
have certain value add that you can
bring to the market with your product.
You have certain expertise.
You have certain inherent strengths as
a company or inherent sort of assets
that you can bring to the product.
And your product should be
built around those primarily.
It's important to design for usability,
understand what the
workflow is of the users.
How do users expect to
work with this product,
and how can we make the
product map to that experience?
Think about the interaction
with other applications.
If your application is aimed
for less sophisticated users and
you're a single window product
like iMovie was originally,
it's unlikely that the user's
going to be interacting with other
applications at the same time.
They're editing movies.
They're not doing drag and drop.
They might do cut and paste, perhaps,
but not likely.
And so within the application,
they might do cut and paste,
but not any data exchange with
other applications in that sense.
Interaction with other applications
is important to think about as you
consider who your user base is.
And all of these things,
in terms of planning,
help you to craft what your product will
be and what its feature set will be.
I find as I meet with developers
that everybody's trying,
you know, most people are trying to
do everything for everybody.
And so then they're demoing the
product for me as I do a UI review
and they're showing off how,
you know,
the app can do this and it can export
and import and drag and drop and,
you know, it can stand on its head
and it does all this stuff.
And I keep coming back to them saying,
well, who's using this product?
Well, you know,
we've got some customers here and say,
well, you know, who's using this?
What are their needs?
And as I keep driving on that point,
developers realize, you know what?
Actually, we don't need that.
We could drop that whole feature.
No one would care.
And the usability of the
product might increase.
So I don't want to belabor the point.
I've got tons of stuff
to go through today.
So let me move on.
All right.
Deliver solutions and not features.
I hammer on this every year at WC,
and I think we're getting
better in this as a community,
as a platform,
we're getting better in this regard.
But still, and there's some examples
I'll show you later on,
still there's this tendency to just
pack in the features because there's
pressure from your marketing team or
whoever it is that's giving you pressure
as an engineer to get those checkboxes
on the side of the product box,
right?
It's not about features for the user.
It's about whether the product
delivers on the promise.
It's about what it can do.
So you need to be producing products that
deliver an end solution for customers
that is the be-all and end-all for them.
Use the 80% solution.
This is really all about designing
for 80% of your customers.
Once you identify who your users are,
then you can sort of aim for trying
to please 80% of those well-defined,
for that well-defined audience.
A lot of people spend most of their time
developing for 20% of their audience,
who tend to be the vocal minority.
It's the people who tend to be a
little bit more sophisticated who can
get that feedback into the developer
through a blog or through an email
or whatever mechanism there is.
The less sophisticated users kind of go,
"Well, you know,
I'm not sure how to get the
feedback to the developer,"
so they're kind of silent.
They're the ones you kind
of want to design for rather
than the vocal minority,
so keep that in mind.
Don't always design
for the vocal minority.
The best tools are the ones you're
not even aware you're using,
right?
If you think of a carpenter
or a mechanic or any of the
tradespeople out there in the world,
they have whole vast
collections of tools.
Why?
Because every one of those
tools is properly balanced,
it's tuned exactly for what it does,
and I think it's no different
in the software industry.
I think I would much rather have
a computer with hundreds of apps,
all that are tuned for what
they're supposed to do,
all that are scriptable so I can
use something like Automator to
start connecting them together
and create a great workflow,
than having three apps that are just,
you know,
got thousands of features in them
that I can't even find half of,
half of the features for.
All right.
Third thing to do in terms
of planning your product is
understanding your market needs.
If you think about the characteristics,
for a moment,
of some of the best software
you've used on the platform,
what would you come up with?
Some of the characteristics of the
software and the best platform,
I think,
are the ones down here on the left.
Some of the best software I've
ever used was high performance,
very responsive.
It was elegant.
It was attractive.
It was dead easy to use.
I got into the thing and I was
able to do what I wanted to do.
It was compatible.
As I started using it, I realized, hey,
I need this image from over here,
this whatchamacallit from
some such other application.
And boom, I could get it in there,
no problem.
Very mobile, right?
Launches quickly in my PowerBook,
has no issues going to sleep.
It's just a really mobile application.
It's accessible.
We'll talk about that a little bit more.
I think these are some of the
characteristics that we all want
in the products that we use,
whether they're the ones we write
or whether they're the ones we use.
So if we look at some of those
characteristics and then contrast
them with some of the market segments
that many of you are participating in,
and certainly Apple is participating in,
it's interesting how some of
them map to those market needs.
This isn't meant to be the definitive
statement of where Apple's participating,
doing business.
This isn't meant to be the
definitive statement of what
the characteristics are for any.
Again,
it's John's perspective on this point,
and I think the whole point here is
just to get you to think about what
are the characteristics that you
want in your application and how
do those map to the market segment
in which you're participating.
As you understand who your user is,
you're going to identify them and
place them within a market segment.
So let's just take the first two columns.
If you're developing a
game for the platform,
what are likely to be the highest
priority characteristics for you
that you have within your product?
Well, high performance is key for games,
right?
Great responsiveness,
great fast rendering of stuff on screen,
attractiveness.
A lot of the sex appeal of games
is how cool they look and what the
audio is like and how attractive.
The game is a game of games.
That's what the whole experience is.
And easy to use, I think,
is important for games, too.
If it's too hard to play, it's like,
well, forget this.
Contrast that with the home user,
with the home market, you know,
high performance isn't
as big a deal for them.
In fact, I chose not to put it on the
slide as an option for them.
I would say for home users,
for the home market, infrequent,
less sophisticated users typically,
elegance, attractiveness,
and ease of use are key.
Once you identify which
characteristics you want to go after,
it's important to prioritize them.
So take those same markets.
Again, this is John's opinion.
This is not meant to be the authority.
But I would say for games,
number one is performance.
So if you're writing a game
and you haven't run some of the
performance analysis tools and
tuned that product for Mac OS X,
I think you're missing the boat in
terms of your opportunity to stand out
and distinguish your application on the
platform relative to your competition.
Responsiveness is, again, key.
I think the two go together.
And attractiveness.
Home users, I think the number one thing
for most users who are less
sophisticated is ease of use.
If you don't get that right,
your product, I think,
isn't going to be nearly as
successful as it could be.
All right.
So once you've done all those things,
you sort of throw it all into the pot,
you stir up the soup,
and I think out of that comes a great
starting point and a great understanding
for what your product can be.
And then it's from there that you go on
to your development plans and you sort
of figure out what you're thinking about.
What your feature set will be
and how are you going to end
up delivering the solution that
you think that market needs.
And again, you know,
I touched on this a little bit before,
avoid the market buckshot approach,
buckshot market approach,
which is kind of like stick
the product in a gun and shoot,
you know, and hope it hits as
many users as possible.
It doesn't work, I don't think.
And most of the developers I've met with
agree that if you focus the product,
you're going to get a great,
great experience and great business.
So that's planning, step one.
The second thing is creating a first...
Creating a great first impression.
This is all about surprising and
delighting users from the start.
Remember,
you go to this restaurant and you get
this great aroma and the music is great
and you think the people you're with are
great and the whole thing is awesome.
I think that is true
for software as well.
And I've reviewed tons of software in
the years at Apple and I'll tell you,
some get this right and some do not.
I think first of all it
starts with packaging.
What is your physical packaging
like if you're in a retail store?
Clearly some of you might be
developing for enterprise or
for in-house or for schools.
There may not be a real package,
so that's fine.
Just ignore this.
But for those of you in a retail store,
I think packaging is a big deal.
If you're not communicating the
system requirements in the package,
you're setting yourself up
for a tech support call,
which costs money because a
user's going to call in and say,
hey, I bought this product and it
doesn't run on my machine.
So make sure that system
requirements are really clear.
If it runs on Mac OS X,
put the badge on it.
Distribution.
A lot of software goes in retail stores.
It's on a CD.
It's in a box.
But equally, there's a lot of you selling
software directly on the Internet,
and that's great.
Disk images are the way to go.
Put your software in a disk image.
It's already compressed.
You can put a password on
it if that's important.
But avoid compressing the compressed.
I have seen some really, really awful,
really scary situations where I've got,
you know,
I get a CD or I download something,
and there's stuff inside, you know,
there's a stuff inside an HQX,
inside of a DMG, inside of a... I don't
know how that happens,
but it just does, and it's something that
we should all avoid.
Installation is a great way to
create a great first impression.
Make it dead easy.
Users buy the product, they spent money,
they want to get this
thing up and running,
they probably have a real need
that they want to satisfy,
and if your product is a pain to install,
it's going to just knock down
their impression of the product.
Drag installs are great.
Disk images support drag installs.
The thing mounts and you drag your
icon over to the applications folder.
The user can put it wherever they want,
which I think is really
critical for installs.
Disk images,
I don't know if you knew this,
but disk images allow you to display a
software license agreement or a EULA.
It's a little bit hokey
getting it to work,
but you can make it happen.
And so if that's the only reason
you're using an installer,
so you can display some sort
of legal license agreement,
you can actually get away from installer,
go to a disk image, and put that license
agreement in the disk image.
or go with the
Mac OS X package installer.
So there's a session later on today,
I think, about using the installer.
I think it's important to avoid
shutting down other processes.
Recently, I installed some software
for the Apple Design Awards,
and the blasted installer forced
me to shut down everything
that was running on my machine,
my browser, my mail, everything,
just so it could install the software.
I'm not sure why,
and it was a total pain.
Avoid unnecessary authentication.
If you're not installing outside of
the current logged-in user's domain
and just put stuff on that inside
their home directory or what have you,
there's no need for authentication,
so don't ask me to authenticate.
It's a bother.
And avoid custom installers.
Don't write your own thing.
Just use what's available today on
Mac OS X or from some third parties.
There's some good software
installers that are available.
And the other thing is
consider first-time launch
initialization or configuration.
So allow for a drag install,
but then the first time
your app is launched,
build in sort of your own
custom installer at that point,
but don't make it look like an installer.
Just sort of display an alert that says,
one moment, please, while we get set up.
Or if you're a game for kids, say,
one moment, please,
while Mickey Mouse gets ready to
play with you or what have you.
And in the background,
you're installing some stuff.
So I have four little girls,
and there's no more frustrating thing
for me than when my wife calls and says,
we got this CD from you that you
brought home from work to try.
And she says, we can't install it.
And my nine-year-old calls.
And there's multiple installers.
It's a total pain.
And I think this is a great way to
create a great first impression.
So I don't want to belabor the point.
Now, I was going to do an install,
a lousy install demo.
And I decided not to in the end because
to save the face of the developer.
But I'm going to tell you about it
so that there's no logos displayed.
This is an app that is an
installer from a very well-known
manufacturer of printers.
And it is.
It's actually for a scanner.
And so you download this disk image,
and you run this thing,
and it mounts on the desktop,
and there's a single icon.
And you think, okay, great.
But it's clearly not a drag install.
It's got a crummy icon.
It looks like Mac OS 9.
And you double-click this thing,
and you get a license agreement.
And you say agree.
And then it says it runs this funky,
custom,
totally non-Mac interface look and feel.
And so, okay, you figure, okay.
And you click accept or
whatever the question is.
And it says it's going to go.
And it says it's going to go
off and install all this stuff.
Remember, it's just a scanner installer,
okay.
It's just making the
scanner work that I bought.
And.
Eleven minutes later,
seven authentications later,
and 2,700 files later,
the software is installed.
And you know what?
I got a Rolodex software,
and I got this image editing thing,
and I got all kinds of other software,
some of which applied to scanning,
most of which did not.
[Transcript missing]
The fundamentals.
This is all about the essential
elements that your product should have.
And I think pretty much
every product in Mac OS X,
if you're shipping to end users
and you're an application,
this is a big section that
I'm going to talk about here.
But you know what?
This is the stuff that your
app needs to be leveraging.
If it's not, you're going to be totally,
you're going to be,
somebody else is going to stand above
you in terms of the competitive space.
Your competitor is going to come out
and adopt some of these technologies,
and I think they're going to stand head
and shoulders above you as a result.
So, understanding what the essentials
are means that you need to understand
what the Mac OS X environment is
and what it brings to the table.
Mac OS X environment
has a single menu bar.
There's just one.
So don't stick other
ones inside of windows.
It's a layered multi-windowing system.
MDI doesn't cut it.
We don't want child windows
inside of a single parent window.
That's what the desktop is, right?
We want multiple windows that
we can minimize to the dock.
Don't create some other
dock inside of a window,
you know, the MDI experience.
That just doesn't cut it.
So if your app's
shipping on the platform,
this is a basic that
you've got to adhere to.
Another reality of Mac OS X is the dock.
The dock is there.
It's just there.
Users can move it around the screen,
but it's a reality, and it is there,
and your application needs
to respect where the dock is,
because there's nothing more
frustrating than unplugging your
PowerBook from a large display at work,
going on a trip, opening up your display,
and suddenly now this app window
is hidden behind the dock,
and you can't resize it, and, you know,
little things like that.
So respect the dock's position
and size your windows accordingly.
And there's some standard behaviors
for when your app icon is clicked.
Mac OS X is an always-on environment.
Don't rely on rebooting to clear out
caches or clear out temporary files.
It's an always-on environment.
My PowerBook stays live.
I think I probably reboot
every couple of days for,
well, I'll tell you why in a
moment on my next slide.
But there's a reason why I reboot.
But you know what?
If I didn't have it for that situation,
I probably would leave my PowerBook on
for days and not have to restart.
It's always sleep, wake, sleep, wake,
sleep, wake.
The system is always on.
Don't rely on login items to be the
way that stuff's going to start up.
If users cancel a process somehow,
and you're relying on login
to start that thing up,
and there's no other way for the
user to start up that process,
I think you're in trouble.
Well, actually, the user's in trouble,
and they may not know
to get you in trouble,
but...
Another thing about
Mac OS X's environment is
that it's highly adaptable.
The beautiful thing about Mac OS X is
it adapts to all kinds of changes.
I take my PowerBook on my
bike to work every day,
and I plug it into a
cinema display on my desk,
I plug it into the Ethernet network,
and I often unplug it throughout the day,
probably 16, 18 times.
I'm going in and out of my office,
plugging this thing in, unplugging it,
going to meetings,
unplugging from the wired hard LAN,
you know, the Ethernet,
and going on to airport.
So I'm detaching and attaching displays.
I'm detaching and attaching the Ethernet.
I'm unplugging and
plugging my USB printer,
and that's the reason I have
to restart my machine,
because it doesn't realize that
it's an adapting environment,
and eventually,
it just kind of craps out,
and my machine has to be rebooted,
because I can't print anymore,
because this driver hasn't adapted
to the fact that I'm going to be
unplugging and plugging constantly.
If you're developing
software for the platform,
understand it's a highly
adaptive platform,
and therefore,
your app needs to be highly adaptive,
too, and I'm sure you can all
identify products you've
used that are not adaptive.
Another key element of
Mac OS X is multiple users.
This is true multi-user stuff.
It's not,
for those of you who came from Mac OS 9,
it's not pseudo multi-user environment.
Mac OS X is a truly multi-user system,
and there's some implications for you,
the app developer, because of that.
If you have shared resources,
shared blocks of memory,
or what have you, understand that-- well,
first of all,
if you allocate memory and you expect
that if you have multiple instances
of your app running that they're going
to use that shared block of memory,
then you can use a little
trick called identifying
those blocks with session IDs.
But understand,
because of multi-user environment
and fast user switching,
a user could launch
your app in one session.
Somebody else could come along and say,
oh, hey, can I just borrow the
machine for a second?
Or, you know, can I borrow the machine?
Get on it,
switch out to their environment,
and launch your app as well.
So now you've got two
instances of your app running.
What are you going to do with
some of those shared resources?
And can your app handle that?
Can it run in multiple contexts?
Don't assume exclusive
access to resources.
You might be running
in multiple contexts.
If your app is using the
iSight camera right now,
and another user comes along and swaps
out fast user switches to their account,
you need to give up that camera
so that if they're using iChat,
or some other software that needs
the camera or some other resource,
that that's freed up.
Don't lock it and hold it so
that nobody else can use it
in any other user context.
Not all users have the
same access privileges.
So in one context,
if your app is making some assumptions
about privileges on the hard drive,
it can't necessarily make the
same assumptions in the other
context in which it's running.
Not all users can write to
the applications directory.
Multiple users,
if your app is running and users save,
default to their home directory.
And while I'm talking
about home directories,
let me just make a point here
that the documents folder
is only for user-created,
double-clickable documents.
Don't stick anything in the
documents folder that relates to
supporting application support files.
Fast user switching introduces or brings
to light an interesting user experience,
which is I might be working currently
on the machine in a bunch of software,
and I'm editing a bunch of documents,
and I didn't save them yet,
because that's how a lot of people work,
actually.
And someone comes along to that machine.
Think of the classroom,
context of a classroom or
higher ed or even in an office.
Multiple users using the single machine.
Current user is editing stuff.
Another user comes along,
switches out to their,
logs into their account,
so these files aren't saved, right,
because the context is just switched out.
And now the second user
shuts down the machine.
Well, your app can do some basic stuff
to deal with that and really
create a great user experience.
And the Mail app does this today.
Basically,
it's called Fast Logout and Auto Save.
As long as your app handles
the standard quit Apple event,
you're going to get notification
that the machine is going down
or that your app has to quit,
basically.
And at that time,
make sure that your app can deal
with saving a file to a temporary
location provided by the system
without any user interaction.
So just assign it some name,
untitled or what have you,
put it to the temporary
location as a draft,
and then when your app
restarts next time,
check that temporary location for
any files that are of your type and
open those things up automatically.
Try it with Mail.
It does a great thing.
You're drafting some emails, boom,
the system goes down.
Next time you launch Mail,
those windows open up.
How cool is that?
Every app on the platform
should be doing that.
Another thing about the
Mac OS X environment is that it provides
consistent interface for common tasks.
The beauty of common interfaces is that
users have the experience of picking
people or fonts or whatever they're
interacting with from other applications,
and so they bring that experience
to bear in your application.
If your app then allows them to pick
fonts or choose colors in a completely
different way that's custom for your app,
the user has a problem.
So I think just using all of the
APIs that are available in Mac OS X for
common interfaces is just great.
It's just good.
It's a good thing to do.
Some examples here,
Address Book Framework,
Disk Recording for
standardized UI for that,
Apple Help for user assistance,
and many more.
I didn't even list half of them here.
Yet another fundamental and essential
on Mac OS X for every application on
the platform is the accessibility and
spoken interface feature of Mac OS X.
Spoken interface today is
in a public or beta preview.
It's going to be shipped and
built into Mac OS X Tiger.
If your application,
if your product is shipping
into education at any
level or into government,
you need to understand that
Section 508 is a big deal.
Most customers aren't going to
be purchasing software that's
not Section 508 compliant,
and there's stuff you can
do today to prepare for this
capability coming in the future.
It's actually a lot of this
is in Mac OS X Panther today.
The accessibility stuff in Spoken
Interface was designed for users who
are blind or have low vision or other
vision disabilities and other learning
disabilities or learning disabilities.
It's built in, not bolted on.
There's no extra installer,
no licensing to be done from you.
It works the same way
in every application.
It leverages the keyboard shortcuts
that you have in your app.
It just works with
everything that you've done,
provided you follow the rules.
And there are rules for how to develop
accessible applications for Carbon,
Cocoa, and Java.
Every developer can do this,
and the experience is basically
that everybody can participate
and use your product,
all inclusive.
John Geleynse
Another reality on Mac OS X,
and this is really cool stuff,
is the multilingual capabilities.
The international technologies and
Unicode support in Mac OS X enable
you to ship an app that is
deployable in dozens of languages.
Mac OS X, out of the box, ships with,
what, I don't know, 16 languages?
Your app doesn't need
to do anything extra.
You don't need to
license any extra fonts.
You don't need to create any extra code
for rendering these fancy characters,
Japanese or Chinese or Hebrew or
whatever language you want to display in.
It's just there, and it's for free,
provided you adopt Unicode.
Well, some of you might sit
in the audience and say,
well, it doesn't matter.
I just ship in the UK,
or I just ship in North America.
Well, you know what?
There's more and more schools,
for example,
that have students coming in from
other countries who don't speak,
in North America here, for example.
More and more students coming
in who don't speak English,
who have a foreign, you know,
mother tongue, and they're coming
into an English school.
How cool would it be if
the software they used,
displayed an interface in their language,
in their mother tongue,
and the curriculum in English?
Well, let me show you what
that would look like.
It's a real quick demo,
but this shows off just how a standard
app that's currently available
in Mac OS X can show multiple
languages in a single document.
So I'm just launching this RTF file.
It's showing in TextEdit one document.
No extra code in TextEdit to do this.
It's just Unicode compliant.
Your app can display
all of these languages.
It's all selectable text-- Thai, Greek,
Hebrew, Arabic, Korean, Russian, Hindi.
Hey, something happened there.
It worked last night.
But anyway, you could select this stuff,
drag and drop it to the desktop.
It's just standard behaviors,
and your app can do this.
And I don't have time,
but we could switch out
TextEdit to the Finder,
change its default language.
It would launch in Japanese,
and this content would
display exactly the same.
And I was just recently at NECC,
which is the
Education Computing Conference,
or whatever, anyway.
It was for educators.
And this really hit home
for the developers there,
the fact that they could deliver an
app on 10 that could display curriculum
in one language or multiple languages,
and the interface of the
application display in the
native tongue of the student.
So just because you're not
necessarily sending your
product to multiple countries,
you might have users right
at home who are multilingual,
and your app can take advantage of that
and deliver a great experience for them.
Another reality of
Mac OS X is gorgeous graphics,
right?
Quartz 2D and OpenGL deliver
some of the great stunning
effects you saw in the keynote.
And all of that's great and
all of it's coming in tiger,
but the truth is
A lot of developers are nowhere near
developing products that look like some
of the stuff we showed in the keynote.
The reality is a lot of developers
that I've interfaced with and that
my team have met with over the last
couple of years are still struggling
with this cross-platform thing.
And the problem with cross-platform,
I mean, from a business point of view,
I understand completely,
and we're going to do everything to
help you deploy on multiple platforms.
But the struggle from a user experience
point of view with cross-platform
development is that you typically
end up delivering a very sort of a
lowest common denominator experience,
whether it's through the
visuals or the interaction or
the quality of stuff on screen.
It typically isn't
optimized for the platform.
The great graphics on Mac OS X enable
everything you see on screen,
the transparency, the shadowing,
the animations that are going on.
All of that stuff now is going
more and more through the
OpenGL pipeline and onto the GPU.
If your app isn't leveraging that stuff,
you're not going to get
that great experience.
And the truth is, if you take education,
for example, in the education space,
K through 12,
students are are getting gorgeous
graphics and surround sound
and a fantastic multimedia
experience on their game machines,
Game Boy Advance, Xbox, right?
And so they're having that experience
at home and then they come to school
and they're running with your product
in the classroom and you're you know,
on Quick Draw,
or you're doing something cross-platform.
So it's just, it just doesn't cut it.
And let me just show you,
I don't have stunning, you know,
rippling water kind of demos,
but I want to show you three
products that I think really
demonstrate this well.
So the first is, I just want to contrast
Quick Draw with Quartz.
Let me get rid of this.
And here on the left,
we've got a fine product
called Apple Works.
And on the right,
we've got a product called OmniGraffle.
and OmniGraffle does diagrams and stuff.
Anyway,
the point is it draws with Quartz,
Quartz 2D.
And so I'm just going to zoom in
on this stuff here and show you
what's going on a little bit.
So first of all,
support for Unicode text.
I don't know what this says in Japanese,
and for the Japanese in the audience,
I apologize if this
is anything... Anyway,
I just put some characters in there.
But this is the same text in Apple Works.
Great Unicode support.
So there's a problem there.
Notice this.
Let me zoom in even more here.
Look at this gorgeous anti-aliased text,
right?
Look at the great smooth
line here that's drawn,
and the circle, fantastic,
nice smooth edges, right?
Knot.
And you contrast that with great
anti-aliased text that displays
beautifully at any rotation,
any size, any effect you apply on it.
Notice the circle is, sorry,
didn't mean to make you seasick there.
Notice the circle is transparent.
This one is not.
No transparency support in QuickDraw.
It's free in quartz.
Gradient fills, a little bit more banded
here in Quick Draw.
This is a really pixelated graphics.
This is a rotated JPEG.
Quickdraw can't handle
that very well at all.
This is rotated in quarts.
Now the picture itself
is a little pixelated,
so I apologize for that.
I whipped this together and
I'm not a graphics demoing guy.
But the point is, these curves, the text,
it's all great, and when you contrast
that with Quickdraw,
it just doesn't cut it.
So it's up to you, right?
How are you going to
differentiate your product?
This is a great way to differentiate
it by leveraging Quickdraw 2D.
Another app that I want to show you is
This application, it's Curvus Pro.
If you think of on Mac OS 9,
there was the graphing calculator.
Pretty cool app in its day, right?
But totally quick draw based.
This is Curvus Pro.
It takes full advantage of Quartz, 2D,
and OpenGL to do 3D models.
Formulas, based upon formulas that
I have no idea what they mean.
This is stuff I failed in school,
but nonetheless.
You know, here's another one.
This is pretty cool stuff.
And you know what?
Because this app developer-- and this
was submitted to the Apple Design Awards,
by the way,
and it was written by a student--
Because this developer used Quartz 2D,
this stuff, they can print to PDF from
an OpenGL context.
How cool is that?
Suddenly, that means that students
can take this stuff,
print it to PDF,
send it off to somebody who
doesn't even have the app,
and say, Hey, teacher, look at, you know,
the formula that I came
up with last night,
and is this right?
And what about this?
And, you know, whatever.
They can distribute this through PDF,
so I think that's pretty cool.
And so using the right graphics
technologies enables that.
And lastly,
I want to show you the use of OpenGL.
I think that really enhances
the student's experience.
This is a product called Starry Night,
and I'm just going to go to...
A dark time of day.
And essentially what you've got here
is you're in a field and there's some,
you know, some stuff in the background,
mountains and stuff.
And as you point to the night sky,
any star, you're getting information
about that star and stuff is
moving along in real time.
And so you see the night sky moving.
This is a cool product, by the way,
if you just want to go out in
the backyard with your power book
and your children and show them
what's going on in the night sky.
You can even turn on light
distortion from the city lights.
Turn that on and it hides like a light.
It's like most of the stars,
but you can get at some
of the brighter ones.
Very cool stuff.
Well,
what you can do is using OpenGL here,
I can just say go to, let's say, Neptune.
So let's just say go there.
And it takes us off from the earth.
We go through the atmosphere.
And hopefully this is
going to work nicely.
I don't know if you can see,
there are stars flying by.
Might be a little bit difficult
to see on screen here.
I don't know, maybe it takes a long
time to travel to Neptune.
Here we go, here we go, here we go,
here we go.
Here's Neptune.
Not a very exciting planet.
I don't know why we're a
little jerky all of a sudden,
but let's go back to Earth.
We're heading towards the sun.
And while that's running,
let me just keep talking,
and then we'll switch back to
the slides in a moment there.
But you know, for students,
this is so compelling.
This is so different than
looking at a textbook.
And you couldn't possibly do
this kind of stuff in Quick Draw.
So taking full advantage of the graphics
on Mac OS X are going to let you
distinguish your application like crazy
on the platform over your competitors.
Okay, let's switch back to slides.
I'm not sure.
You know, the problem with demos is
sometimes they run great,
sometimes they don't.
That's probably my fault.
Another reality on Mac OS X is stuff
that you heard about in the keynote.
It's the spotlight technology.
This is certainly coming technology.
It's not here today,
but I think there are things you
can do to start planning for this.
You've seen the demos a couple times.
I'm not going to go through that.
There are some things you
can do today to support it.
There's support for standard
stuff right out of the box,
but if you've got custom
proprietary file formats,
you can begin to think about
writing an importer for that.
You can start using the standard
keys that exist in Spotlight,
but then you can help work with us as we
build a community around this technology,
help us define some of the custom keys
that we need to have for file types
that we maybe didn't think about or
for some workflows that are key in the
market segment in which you participate.
So more information on the
community stuff that we're doing.
So those are the fundamentals,
and that's a lot of stuff.
But you know what?
When you bake bread,
you cannot leave out the key ingredients.
If you create a great
dinner party for people,
there's some fundamentals
that have to be there.
You've got to have
silverware on the table.
You've got to have napkins.
You've got to have a cup, right?
If you leave some of that stuff out,
the experience could go
downhill pretty quickly.
It's the same thing with
software development.
There's some fundamentals, I think,
that are going to enable
you to distinguish your
app from the competition.
All right, designing for Aqua.
Making things attractive and easy to use.
This is all about the ambiance, right?
First impressions,
now I get this product going.
Now how do I feel about it as I use it?
Is it great to look at and compelling?
Is our information organized well?
And is the usability, is it good?
And it's so important that it's almost
like the real estate expression when
you're selling a house or buying a house.
I forget which it is.
I'm not a realtor.
I'm a software.
But it's all about location, location,
location, right?
You can sell pretty much anything
if it's in the right location.
And it's important.
Location is important.
Well, you know what?
Adopting Aqua and creating a delivery.
a really great user
experience is that important.
There's lots of stuff you need to do,
and we're gonna get
into this specifically.
First of all, age old design principles.
And you think, oh yeah,
I've heard this before.
I read the human interface guidelines,
you know, 10 years ago, 12 years ago.
Well, you know what,
this stuff is really important.
We're still thinking about
these things as we design Aqua.
And you should be, as you design your
application for the platform,
you should be thinking
about these principles.
This stuff is not old.
It's true, as true today as it
was when it was first,
you know, thought up and presented.
And I'll give an example.
Feedback and communication,
I think one of the key characteristics
of Aqua today is the fact that it uses
animation through sheets and drawers,
the genie effect,
and different types of animations
through expose and stuff to
communicate status to users.
It takes us to a whole new level in
terms of communicating status and
giving feedback as to what's going on.
That's a real characteristic of Aqua.
Modelessness.
We've gone from being app modal for
many dialogues to being document modal.
That's a trend towards modelessness.
We're less modal now within the
application as a result of Sheets.
So modelessness is a key
goal for us within Mac OS X.
Aesthetic integrity.
Aqua is just gorgeous compared
to what we had on Mac OS 9 or
compared to anything else elsewhere,
I think.
The aesthetic integrity, the gorgeous,
the beauty of Mac OS X, I think,
just stands head and shoulders
above everything else.
And if your app can't
fit into that world,
it's going to stand
out like a sore thumb.
And if you've been in my sessions before,
I've showed lots of
examples of how that's true.
Now, designing a good interface requires
that you follow those principles,
but also think about getting organized.
And by getting organized,
I'm going to talk about something
called the user's mental model
or their conceptual model.
What I mean by that is
that it's important,
as you understand your markets and
your users and what your feature is
going to do and the solution it's
going to provide to your users,
it's important that you
start to think about,
now, what is the user's conceptual model
or mental model as they approach the
task that your software is providing?
What are the concepts
they're thinking about?
What's the workflow that
they're experiencing?
What workflow have they experienced?
What objects and object
hierarchy exist in your product?
What expectations is the
user bringing to the table?
These are big questions to ask.
And a lot of developers that
I've interacted with haven't
even thought about this stuff.
They've kind of just, you know,
their impression of what the software
should do and they've put it together.
And while it's compelling,
it's not nearly as compelling
and doesn't register,
I think, with a lot of users.
This is a really important
concept to get down.
Once you've figured out
what that conceptual model
is for 80% of your users,
it's important to reflect that model
through the menu organization and layout
and organization of the main window,
toolbars, utility windows, et cetera.
We'll go through a couple of examples.
And when you design your product
to reflect that conceptual model,
it's important to keep these kind
of five points in your mind as well.
Make sure that there are affordances.
If something doesn't look clickable,
users won't necessarily know that it is.
Design for simplicity.
Keep simplicity in mind.
Frequently accessed items
should always be accessible.
Some of the best software
that I've ever used,
just instantly the stuff I needed
was right there when I needed it.
And some of the products that
won the Apple Design Awards that
you'll hear about tonight really
reflect that concept well.
Familiarity.
People's mental model is based
on their previous experience.
We talked earlier about leveraging
the existing UI that's delivered
through some of the APIs in Mac OS X.
Take advantage of that
because it provides for a
familiar experience for users.
Availability.
It's a whole lot easier for people
to see something on screen that they
need to interact with than for them
to recall some menu command that's two
levels deep or some button in a dialog.
So expose the features that are critical
to users so that stuff is available.
And provide good feedback to users,
and we'll talk about
that more specifically.
So, how does that apply in the real
world in terms of the design that
we've implemented for some software?
Well,
if you think of iTunes and consider the
mental model or conceptual model that
most users have as they approach this,
they understand that it's a music
management piece of software.
It manages their music.
And so they have an understanding that
there's going to be songs in there.
There's going to be some way
of organizing those songs.
They probably have this idea
that you could play the stuff,
and then maybe they're searching.
And so the UI is modeled
completely around that.
There's songs.
It's a dominant part of the UI.
There's the collections where we
organize the music into playlists,
smart playlists, etc.
There's the playback controls, right,
very clearly on the interface.
And lastly,
there's the searching functionality.
It's all there.
So the UI reflects completely,
or almost perfectly,
the mental model that users
have as they approach the task.
And so users just get up and running
with this product really fast.
They just get it.
That's what getting it means.
Next example.
This is a product called
Unison from Panic.
These guys do great stuff.
This is a product that totally revives
the Usenet for Macintosh users.
Now the Usenet's got lots of content,
and we'll not talk about
any of that specifically,
but there's some good stuff out there.
And the mental model that
you approach Usenet with,
if you know what it is,
you understand what its hierarchy is.
There's groups and there's
messages within groups,
and messages contain
pictures and other stuff.
If you don't know what
Usenet's structure is,
Unison's product is so,
Unison is so well designed in
terms of the mental model that
it basically communicates the
model of the environment to you,
the user, and so you get it right away.
And so here,
basically Usenet is all about groups,
and so the main groups window is
structured in a way that you just
kind of go through the browser view.
And there's a menu that
supports that key concept.
And then within a message,
we've got the four elements of message,
files, images, music.
And so there's a message
menu that is part of this.
So the UI really supports
the model that exists.
Soft RAID,
another great product in Mac OS X.
If you're doing RAID stuff,
you basically have a simple mental model,
which is you've got physical devices,
Which it calls "Discs." You've
got logical volumes on those
discs called-- You've got
logical volumes called "Volumes."
And there's a menu to support that,
sorry.
And then there's a utilities menu,
which I don't highlight.
Sorry, I run through these slides again.
There's a utilities menu,
which basically is,
you've got these hard disks,
you've got these volumes,
and then you do some utilitarian stuff
to these drives or these volumes,
and you format them,
or you partition them, or what have you.
And that's it, that's the UI.
And yet it's a highly complex,
highly functional product.
It does a ton of stuff,
but most of it is hidden
behind the scenes for you,
the user, because you don't need
to be concerned with it.
Another great product, Bike Route.
If you're a cyclist,
this is a really cool product.
It basically lets you download,
take map formats,
there's a certain map format out there,
I can't remember the exact details,
but there's maps out there about cycling,
biking paths or routes
that exist in the world.
And you can load those maps
into the product and then come
up with custom bike trips.
And you choose different nodes
and then it's got this concept
of a map but then a route.
And then within a route you've
got the profile of that route,
which is the altitudes you might
cycle around and what the instructions
are for following that custom thing.
Anyway,
the point is the UI totally supports
this model that you come to,
which is that I've got a map
and it's got routes on it.
And so the route could just
be between those two points,
and there's a menu associated with that,
and that's it.
And so the mental model the user comes to
this product with is supported by the UI,
and the hierarchy of objects and such
is set up in the main menu bar as well.
But it isn't always that easy.
It's easy to get this wrong.
Here's a great product,
and this is in no way meant to
belittle the product in any way,
shape, or form.
Mac Journal.
It won an Apple Design Award years ago.
I think this is a really cool product.
But there's one little
thing that I think is wrong.
And that is that as
I approach this product,
and as most users approach the product,
they have this concept of a journal,
which is kind of the container object,
right?
And within a journal, you've got entries.
Well, the hierarchy of the main menu
bar doesn't reflect that at all.
In fact, if you think about app menu,
document menu, right, file menu, edit,
and then other stuff,
which is where you kind
of go parent object,
child object, sub-child object,
et cetera,
that's the hierarchy you should
be reflecting in the menu bar.
That's not reflected here.
So the journal,
which is the parent container object,
is actually further down
the menu bar than the entry.
itself, because journals contain entries,
entry is really in the
place of the document.
And I just -- personally,
I think that's backwards.
So the change, I would say,
is just flip those around.
They call -- the window is
called the Journal Window.
It's actually the document format,
et cetera.
And so I hope this drives home the
point that the menu bar needs to
reflect the hierarchy of your objects.
Let's take another example.
If you're a multimedia
authoring application,
you probably have your document format,
which is your project.
Within projects, you've got a background.
Well, you might have scenes.
Scenes have backgrounds.
Scenes also have layers.
Layers have, you know,
characters or objects.
Objects have attributes.
And so you could imagine
the menu bar going,
you know, app name, projects, edit,
scenes, you know, characters, format,
you know, for attributes, et cetera.
And so your menu bar needs to reflect
that hierarchy from parent down
to the -- to the to the smallest
child sort of container element.
And if you don't get the
mental model right at all,
basically you go back to what
I was talking about earlier in the
Knowing Your Application slide,
which is you get just feature creep.
Your product is all about
features rather than a solution.
Here's a product that is supposed
to be a to-do list manager,
but it's so laden with features
and buttons in the toolbar,
and I didn't even show the menu bar,
I don't even know where to begin.
I don't know what the model is
that this application works on.
And so it becomes a problem.
The feature, while it's a very,
very capable product,
and I'll just side note,
I'm working with this developer
to make this thing pretty cool,
but I wanted to show an
earlier instance of this window
because it's just messed up,
and you have no idea what
you're supposed to do.
A to-do list manager product, to me,
should be very lightweight,
not in my face, be there when I need it,
and then go away when I don't need it,
and all that kind of stuff,
and this app doesn't do that.
I can't size the window
beyond a certain small size,
which basically takes up my whole screen,
and there's too much stuff all over it.
So, all right,
another element of designing
a great interface is providing
great feedback and communication.
You know, this is, in my opinion,
providing good feedback to your
users is like the feedback and
communication we need to have in
good relationships in our life,
whether it's to our bosses
or our teammates or spouses
or children or what have you.
I think there's a great parallel
that can be drawn there.
And if you think about the feedback
that you provide in your application,
how you report errors or how you give
status updates or communicate progress,
it may not be so non-intrusive,
non-interruptive.
You know,
this is a must for anyone involved
in developing a Mac OS X product.
And if you think about the feedback
that you provide in your application,
how you report errors or how you give
status updates or communicate progress,
it may not be so non-intrusive,
non-interruptive.
You know,
this is a must for anyone involved
in developing a Mac OS X product.
And if you think about the feedback
that you provide in your application,
how you report errors or how you give
status updates or communicate progress,
it may not be so non-intrusive,
non-interruptive.
in your application.
You want to figure out what
are the reporting points?
What are those milestones that the
user really wants to know about?
And then how do we effectively
communicate the reaching of
those milestones or the not
reaching of those milestones?
So only communicate status that matters.
Use appropriate progress indication.
So either an indeterminate bar
or a determinate progress bar
or the spinning gear thing.
And related to that,
I think consistent placement of those
little gauges or dials or whatever
you're using to communicate status.
It should be consistent placement.
If you look at mail, the spinning gear is
always in the same place.
And users get accustomed to looking
in that location for an update as
to whether or not the machine is
busy or the application is busy.
Consistent placement
of progress indicators.
Another way of communicating feedback
is through badging your dock icon.
You can, like mail does,
you can show the number of
mail messages that are there.
And other apps are doing some really
cool stuff with their application icons.
And then providing users with useful
error messages and disabling commands
that don't apply in the current context.
I want to zero in on these
because I still see a lot
of difficulty in this area.
So it's important to report errors,
but not this way.
And this is out of a
shipping app on the platform.
It's important to report errors,
but always check spelling.
So this says, in case you can't read
at the back of the room,
it says, aim error.
Could not add mformic at mac.com,
guy on my team, to your buddy list.
Feedback error is zero.
I'm not sure what a feedback error is.
It's important to report errors or
report a situation that's occurred.
It might not necessarily be an error,
but it's something that's occurred that
hinders you from proceeding further.
Here's an app that I was
playing with the other day,
and it requires that you drag
and drop an image onto each side,
into these kind of giant
image wells or whatever.
And so I dragged an
image in out of iPhoto,
and that was great.
And then I dragged another image,
which happened to be oriented
differently than the first.
The one was portrait,
and the other one came in at landscape.
And I didn't know.
There was no indication in the
UI that I couldn't do that.
And so I did that,
and I got this sheet came down,
and it said,
drag the image as a different size,
extend or crop.
Well, I just dragged an image in here.
I don't want to extend or crop it.
And I'm not sure where distort came from,
actually.
At this point, I'm thinking, OK,
but I can't cancel.
So now what's going to happen?
Now, in this case, it's not a big deal.
But you know what?
If this was some crazy 3D
rendering task that I just
started and I couldn't cancel,
I'd be screwed.
Because this thing would go
off for a period of time,
and I'd be stuck because I couldn't
stop the thing from processing,
doing whatever it's doing.
So I'm not sure what I'm
supposed to do with this message.
It doesn't communicate enough.
I don't know where distort came from.
It's important to report problems
effectively and provide users
with useful error messages.
I've talked about this every year,
and I feel compelled
to talk about it again.
I apologize if you were here before.
What happened is what you
should say to the user,
then tell them why it happened,
and then tell them what
they can do about it.
What's the solution to the problem?
Avoid yes and no buttons.
There's a lot of ambiguity.
It's often very difficult to write
a good error message and then have a
yes or no button associated with it,
because the user can't, well,
we'll talk about why.
There's that problem,
and then there's the other problem,
and that is that users tend
to scan the error message,
looking for kind of keywords, you know,
that indicate the problem,
and your button labels should
kind of capture those keywords
as the user scans that message
to know which button to click.
You know,
there's something about preferences,
and then there's a button that
says open system preferences.
So you just kind of go, whoop,
hit the button.
and boom,
they're off to solving the problem.
And then, of course,
you could prevent problems from occurring
in the first place by just disabling
menu commands or buttons that don't
make any sense in the current context,
but heaven forbid that that
would happen sometimes.
So here's a way of reporting an error,
you know, error writing file to disk.
Well, it's a good sentence.
It's a complete sentence.
Everything is there that you need
to have there to be good English,
but it's a little, you know,
it's not too outgoing.
So a better report would be this one.
The document cannot be saved
because the disk is full.
Okay, so now I know a little bit
more about what's going on.
And I could probably, from this message,
figure out what I need to do,
which is if I want to save this document,
I've got to go to the finder and
get rid of something so I get a
little bit more space on the drive.
But a whole lot better would
be to do something like this.
And why is this better?
Because, first of all,
it communicates what happened.
The document trip request
could not be saved.
Why did it happen?
Because the disk works stuff.
Not only is the disk full,
but it tells me which disk.
A lot of us have partitioned drives,
multiple hard drives, iDisk, etc.
And now what do I do about it?
Try deleting documents from that drive
or saving the document on another disk.
That's a good error message.
And I wish I would get this kind
of stuff in all of the applications
that I run on the platform.
And it means a little bit of extra
work on your part as a developer,
as an engineer,
because you've got to start looking
at some of those error codes that
are coming back from the APIs.
And that's hard, but you know what?
The end result is a great,
great experience for customers.
And again, prevention is the key.
Rather than display a dialogue
or an alert that's like this,
that says, "You must select at least one
student "before printing the
student attendance summary report,"
Disable the menu items.
So I can't go up and say print
student summary report if
there's no student selected,
right?
It's easy.
You can do this,
and a lot of apps are doing it,
and I hope to see this happening in
100% of the apps on the platform.
So prevent the problem
in the first place,
then you don't have to look at the
error messages and report the alerts.
All right, I've got a few minutes left.
Use standard controls.
If you're delivering
software on the platform,
it should look like
software on the platform.
So there's a ton of stuff in the system,
whether it's AppKit or HIToolbox.
And these are just some examples
of the different sizes of controls.
Many controls were shipped last year.
They're available in Panther today.
They should be used not
in your main dialog boxes,
but they should be used
in your utility windows.
And don't mix and match control
sizes within the same window,
whether it's a main window or
a dialog or utility window.
All right, laying things out.
These examples are dialog boxes,
but they could equally be main windows.
And all of this is true for any window
type that you're designing on screen.
So there's a tendency in
Aqua to center equalize,
and I see people getting
this wrong over and over,
so that's why I feel compelled
to talk about it for a moment.
Center equalize doesn't mean that
everything gets center aligned,
you know, so that you've got kind of
the centered effect on screen.
This is a tab pane.
So you basically lay out your content
according to the layout rules that
are in the human interface guidelines
that I'm going to touch on shortly,
but then you take
I draw a bounding box around all
of it and then sort of center
that box within the tab pane.
And each tab pane might
have different edges,
sizes, but it all gets centered in there.
Here's another example
of where it's done.
Notice if you drew,
notice the orange box around the content,
that box is centered within the dialogue,
and then everything else
is organized around that.
Here is another thing
that needs to be done,
and that is to right
align all of your labels.
If you're labeling groups or labeling
radio buttons or what have you,
those labels need to be right
aligned along their colons.
They also need to have
colons behind them.
Equally, you left align the
controls in those sets.
And when you do that, it looks great,
actually.
Oops, my apologies.
The last one was basically
showing that within,
under the size points there,
that that stuff is indented,
but it's left aligned with sort of
the parent controls that it's under.
This is all about providing
appropriate spacing.
I still see stuff crammed onto
dialog boxes and no margins,
and, you know, it just,
it doesn't feel like
it's cleaned up nicely.
And so there's appropriate
margins that need to be there.
There's standardized
spacing for between items,
between related items in
groups that are there.
There's a larger spacing between
sort of less related groups.
And then there's a larger spacing between
sort of distinct groups on screen.
And you don't even
necessarily need the line,
the horizontal line
that's on that screen.
Action buttons go in the lower right,
nowhere else, lower right.
And the OK button is on the right side,
and it's OK, O-K,
not okie dokie or OKAY or
different variants of that,
which I've seen.
This is really something I see,
and if you get it right, it's great.
It produces a really great design.
But start your labels and check
boxes and radio buttons with
verbs so that all the user really
needs to scan at a just glance,
and they know that if dither is off,
it means it's not dithered, right?
So it's really easy to figure
out what the check box or the
radio button really represents.
And there's a ton more
I could talk about,
but I'm already down to like
five minutes left in the session.
But things like quality icons and,
you know, quality rendered icons and
well-organized toolbars,
you know, not populating your toolbars
with hundreds of icons,
or even 30 or 15 is
too many in many cases.
You know, we can't get into that.
File name extension support,
always display,
use the display name for the document.
If the user didn't name
it with an extension,
they don't want to see the extension
in their document window title.
Quality graphics, all of the graphics
that you draw on screen,
whether it's static images or anything
else should be drawn with quartz,
or at least if it's a static image
should be drawn by a graphic artist,
a visual designer.
And reserved keyboard shortcuts.
Please honor the reserved keyboard
shortcuts that are... identified
in the human interface guidelines.
So, that's the fourth thing you can do,
the fourth area that you can focus
on to create a product that's
distinguished from the competition.
And the last area is really
about delivering quality service.
Right?
There's no bigger turn off than
going to a great restaurant and
getting really crappy service.
And I think when it comes
down to applications,
the analogy I'll draw is performance.
And you're going to get a lot of
content on this at other sessions.
If you hadn't thought
about this material before,
you need to think about this stuff,
because it makes a difference.
And I think when it comes
down to applications,
the analogy I'll draw is performance.
And you're going to get a lot of
content on this at other sessions.
If you hadn't thought
about this material before,
you need to think about this stuff,
because it makes a difference.
Because it makes a difference.
It's a big difference.
Performance is measured in two ways.
I think when you talk to
users about performance,
they think about either number crunching,
just raw data processing.
How fast does the app blur an image
or do whatever transform it's doing or
whatever data processing it's doing.
And other users think of performance
as kind of productivity and
interaction responsiveness.
All of those things can be
tuned on Mac OS X using a ton
of tools that are available.
But really it comes down to you need to
build into your development cycle time
to do the analysis using those tools.
Your engineers or you the engineers
need to be using these tools
because the results are dramatic.
In developer relations,
we hold workshops.
If you've been to one,
you know what the outcome is.
But if you don't know about them,
there are workshops
that are held at Apple.
And we run developers through
these programs for two days
or three days or four days.
And we teach them these tools.
And at the end of three or four days,
we see dramatic,
dramatic increases in the productivity
or the performance of products.
Just by running these tools and
identifying bottlenecks in your code,
identifying where you could
optimize for velocity engine,
identifying older APIs that
you shouldn't be using.
There are more modern
versions and that type thing.
If you're a Carbon app,
There's a bunch of
things you can do today.
And the reason I bring up
Carbon Apps specifically is
it's the Carbon developers,
in many cases,
who need to spend a little bit
more time on these kind of things.
There's a lot of stuff you can do
if you're a Carbon App today on the
platform to optimize for Mac OS X.
Certainly, Cocoa developers can optimize,
too.
I'm not saying that.
But be lazy.
Don't start up your app and initialize
every single buffer that your app's
ever going to use that the user's
going to potentially run into.
Don't load all the movies and get
all the files ready to go so that
when the user clicks some feature,
it happens instantly.
Be lazy.
Do all that stuff when the user does it,
because it makes startup
times really slow.
Reduce your memory footprint.
All this stuff.
Maco binary format, pre-bind, thread.
There's a great session on threading
this week by Xavier Legro on my team.
Really, really good stuff.
There's good content here at the
conference for making your apps totally,
totally fast on the platform.
So that's high performance,
great service, deliver great service.
And so in the end,
There are five areas you could focus on,
and I think if you did these,
you'd deliver great
applications on the platform.
And the pushback we get from developers
as I meet with them often is,
yeah, but you know what?
At the end of the day,
you guys have really small market share,
and so it's really hard to get this done.
Why would we do this stuff?
Why would we go the extra
mile for the platform?
And I always counter with the fact that,
well, whatever the current stat is,
but Steve released,
the current stat that Steve released
yesterday in the keynote is that there
are 12 million Mac OS X users today.
Sure, there could be 200 million.
But there are 12 million users today.
How many of you would like to have
even half of those as your customers?
How many of you would like even a
quarter of those to have a copy of
your product and run that product?
Right?
The reality is there are lots of
users out there on Mac OS X who
are not running your product,
and they're probably not running it
either because they're not aware of it
or because they've run it and they had
a poor user experience or what have you.
There's a variety of reasons,
but there's a lot you can do to elevate
your profile in the Macintosh community.
And partnering with Apple and doing
stuff through developer relations,
we can help raise that exposure.
Make sure your product is listed
in the Mac Products Guide.
Make sure you're posting
on the right websites.
Make sure your app is optimized
for the platform and is designed
in a way that distinguishes itself
from every other application.
Think of the apps that you
found out about just by reading
a review about them that were
totally awesome on the platform.
Why are they totally awesome?
Because they leveraged Quartz.
They were optimized for the platform.
They have gorgeous UI.
They've done everything
right or most things right.
And I would encourage you to look
at these five areas and a lot of
other areas that are covered in the
conference and deliver this stuff,
and you're going to have a really,
really great,
you're going to have a really great,
I think you're going to
get more customers and your
business is going to go up.
So lots of documentation
available for you on the DVD,
I believe.
And if it's not on the DVD,
it's certainly available on the
developer website or on the disk
image that's downloadable off of
connect.apple.com for this session.
Great document is
Apple Software Design Guidelines.
Check it out and the
Human Interface Guidelines.
And then tonight,
come celebrate here with the developers
who did a lot of this stuff and really
produced great products because we're
going to highlight them on stage,
give them an award,
give them a PowerBook or a G5 and
a cinema display as a recognition
of the great software and the
great work that they've done.
So thank you for being here.
I hope this was valuable for you,
and I look forward to your feedback,
and I hope you have a
great conference this week.